---
layout: post
---

After several months of being a non-user, I finally bit the bullet and deleted
my Facebook and Instagram accounts recently. What follows is not an essay trying
to convince the reader to do the same, or a guide to a life without
social-media, or anything of that sort, but a rant about how convoluted it is to
actually delete your accounts.

So, I logged into both Facebook and Instagram today (for deletion) after many
months, and saw the designed-to-catch-your-eye notification buttons, popups,
"like" symbols and other things after a long time. Having grown immune to this,
and feeling a slight sense of superiority, I proceeded straight to the settings
menus to find some "Delete my account" button. What surprised me was the extents
to which these apps go to dissuade the user from actually deleting their
account.

**First**, the option to delete account itself was buried deep into the settings
page and was in a very non-obvious submenu. For Instagram specifically, I had to
duck-duck-go how exactly to delete the account -- that option isn't even part of
the main web-app, but seems to be in some sort of
[legacy, old looking webpage](https://instagram.com/accounts/remove/request/permanent/).

**Second**, these apps encourage the user to "Download a copy" of their account
data before deleting the account. While the intent behind encouraging users to
do so seems suspicious (it's probably to make it easy for the user to re-open
their account sometime later, import that data and start using Facebook again
like before), what was surprising to me was that you actually need to "Request"
a copy of your data from Facebook. OK, so **I** need to _request_ **my** data
from Facebook? How silly is that?

And not just that, it takes an absurdly long time for the data fetch request to
actually get completed. I refuse to believe that, in 2022, it takes more than 2
whole minutes (yes, that's how long I waited before realizing that I was being
made a fool out of) for a massive company like Facebook with all sorts of
high-performance servers to collect ~18 photos from 7 posts of mine and create a
JSON/HTML out of it and make it available to me for download. They actually made
a new tab in their settings page to show such "pending" data requests, which is
just ridiculous. Facebook probably thought that I would wait for that pending
request and hopefully forget about it (and consequentially about deleting my
account) in a few days.

**Thirdly**, even if you manage to get around all these loop holes and finally
click on the big red[^1] "Delete account" button ... your account isn't deleted.
Well, isn't deleted _yet_. It will get deleted 30 days later. While it is
understandable that account deletion will definitely be more expensive than
"requesting data" because of the large number of cross linked likes/tags/etc to
be deleted, there's definitely a hope on their part that, sometime in the next
30 days, loyal users may come back to their website with drooling tongues and
wagging tails, looking to be patted on their heads.

[^1]:
    It's not really a big red button, but a (equally dangerous looking) big blue
    one.
