---
layout: post
title: Vegetarianism
---

Recently, there has been much fuss about vegetarianism at IIT Bombay.
[You can read more about it](https://archive.is/3KR66), but the _very_ short
summary of the matter is that a group of vegetarian students in Hostels 12, 13,
14 demanded separate tables marked exclusively for vegetarian food (meaning, on
such tables, students would not be allowed to eat non-vegetarian food). The
hostel council agreed to this request, and marked a few tables in the common
mess as "vegetarian only". Another group of students started protesting against
this, calling it separatist/casteist and other things and forcibly brought and
ate non-vegetarian food on these tables as a way of protest. There is certainly
more nuance to this matter, but this should be sufficient for context.

I am a vegetarian from birth (so is my entire family) but I had never given much
thought to this concept before this. But this debacle provoked me to think a lot
about this matter, leading to deep discussions with friends who supported the
hostel council's decision as well as those who didn't. Following are some
_tarkas_ (arguments) used in and _nishkarshas_ (conclusions) drawn from these
discussions, about vegetarianism in general.

# It is morally superior

First off, what is vegetarianism? Is it a food preference? Yes, of course. Is is
**just** a food preference? No, it is also a food practice. **And a morally
superior one**, at that. Calling vegetarianism just a food preference is not
incorrect, but doing so dilutes that fact that it is a morally and ethically
better practice, based on non-violence and non-cruelty.

It might be the case that some (or majority) of Indians who follow vegetarianism
don't give much thought to the ethical aspect of it, and follow the practice
just because everyone in their family does so. But this should not be a reason
to demerit the idea of the practice itself.

And, for a moment, keeping aside the history associated with this practice, it
is a simple fact that, not killing an animal (for eating, or for whatever
reason) when you don't need to, is an ethically better decision than killing
one.

Is killing animals for food illegal? No. At least not yet. But it might very
well happen that, 100 years from now, killing an animal is considered murder and
is punishable by law (just like killing a human today is). That is just how
society progresses. People's values change, and then the laws change to reflect
these new values. Think about it -- what is right and what is wrong can be
decided at a personal as well as a societal level. Laws mostly only document
what the society as a whole thinks is wrong, and prescribe penalties for doing
such things. Today, vegetarians believe that animal killing is _wrong_ (on a
personal level). If (hypothetically), 100 years later, majority of the society
turns vegetarian and starts believing that killing animals is wrong, a law could
be made for the same. But the point is, irrespective of what the law is, each
individual should be free to act according to their own beliefs on what is right
and wrong, as long as those beliefs (like not eating meat) are compatible[^1]
with the law.

And this logic is not limited to vegetarianism. There are people (who call
themselves "vegans") who believe that humans should not be using **any** animal
products at all, because that can result in animal cruelty (for example, humans
consuming cow-milk can lead to exploitation of cows). Jain people believe in not
eating any plant roots, because harvesting a root of a plant (unlike harvesting
fruits) inevitably results in the plant being killed. There should be no doubt
that both of these practices **are** ethically superior even to the usual
practice of "vegetarianism". But just because vegetarianism is 80% there instead
of 100%, does not mean we should discount it and ignore the 80%. The point is,
one should be able to look at these concepts and decide what is objectively
better and more progressive, irrespective of other things like the history of
the concept, or its believer-base.

# It is a family _sanskaara_

For many people in India, vegetarianism has been practiced from many generations
in their families. It is imbibed on children by parents just like other good
values, like those of not telling lies, not indulging in alcohol etc. And this
is done with a similar degree of seriousness as those other values.

If one has been taught that lying/alcoholism is bad, he might decide to stay
away from politics and bars. In a similar vein, if one is taught that eating
non-vegetarian food is a bad thing, he might prefer to stay away from people who
are eating non-vegetarian food, at least while he himself is eating. It is only
natural that we as a society understand vegetarian people who are not
comfortable eating while non-vegetarian food is around, and at least not make
their life harder by intentionally eating meat beside them. This is similar to
how smoking rooms are arranged for smokers, so that non-smokers are not
affected. Except that, in this case, because the smokers are a minority, they
have to do the effort of going to a smoking room and then lighting their
cigarettes there. In our case, since vegetarians are in a minority, it makes
sense for _them_ to be the ones who are alloted a different space, so that the
majority crowd (non-vegetarians, that is) does not face inconvenience.

And I've learnt from personal experience that it takes quite a bit of
personality development for someone who's raised in a strict vegetarian
background, to understand that while eating non-vegetarian food is a bad thing,
the people who eat non-vegetarian food aren't necessarily _bad people_.
Similarly, to continue the analogy, it takes significant personality development
(or "जग बघणे" as it is called in Marathi) to realize that, even though
alcoholism is a bad habit, people who even regularly indulge in alcohol might
not necessarily be _bad people_. Again, as mentioned earlier, people have varied
ways of defining good and bad. Exposure to the world shapes these definitions.
But just because someone's definitions are different, that doesn't give anyone a
license to bully them by forcibly having them eat in the vicinity of
non-vegetarian food.

# It is casteist

There is a line of thought that vegetarianism is associated mainly with Brahman
castes, and is a tool for Brahmans to exert their superiority over others (in
ways unknown to me). There is some truth to this, in the sense that Brahmans
have been following vegetarianism historically, but there are two major aspects
to consider here:

1. Within Brahmans, the rate of vegetarianism is declining. In post-90s
   generations, within the Brahman friends that I have, significant folks do
   consume non-vegetarian food. And this is with their families knowing this and
   being OK with it. The older generations are much more strict about not eating
   meat for themselves, but not so much about their children/grand-children
   eating meat. And there exist Brahman sub-castes who have traditionally been
   eating meat/fish.

   And for the sake of completeness, it is worth mentioning that, within
   Hinduism, according to most texts, the prescribed way of life for _everyone_
   (not just Brahmans) is that of non-violence ("_ahimsa paramo dharma_"), and
   of a dead-animal-free diet.

2. There are _many_ non-Brahman communities who follow a strict vegetarian diet
   within Hinduism. And outside, of course, the Jain community is also known to
   have a strictly vegetarian diet (along with some other rules). So is
   vegetarianism associated with the Brahman community? Yes. But, so is it
   associated with many other communities.

So vegetarianism is far from a Brahman-only thing. And just because it is
associated partly with Brahmans, and Brahmans have been accused of
discrimination/oppression/what-not, does not make vegetarianism-the-practice by
itself a casteist/oppressive thing. The practice itself deserves to be
understood on it's own merits (discussed in the first section)! Not doing so
would be like boycotting cricket because it is associated with England (who
oppressed India), which just doesn't make sense.

# Closing thoughts

It should hopefully be clear from the above discussion that, while taking any
decision regarding practices like vegetarianism, one should look at only the
practice itself, and not the propaganda around it. For the specific case of
IITB, the decision to allot or not allot separate tables for vegetarian-only
food should be a function only of (1) what the practice of vegetarianism itself
entails, and what effect will people following the practice have on the student
community as a a whole, and (2) how much accommodating and inclusive the
institute aims to be of student demands (especially those of minority student
groups). The decision better not be based on imagined second-order issues like
discrimination increasing between students because of separate vegetarian-food
tables, for which there exist other, more direct ways to fight.

[^1]:
    What do I mean by "compatible with the law"? Anything which is legal in the
    current system. One could "believe" (at a personal level) that thieving from
    the rich and giving to the poor is the correct thing to do, but that is not
    compatible with the law ~~(unless the government itself does it and calls it
    taxation and well-fare schemes)~~. One could believe that _not using
    plastic_ is the right thing to do, and that is compatible with the law (so
    is _using plastic_, at least, as of now).
