---
layout: post
title: GPLs in IITB
---

GPLs are the most inseparable aspect of the IITB culture, second probably only
to RG. Supposed to be an acronym for "_gâœ±nd pe laath_", the GPL is what would
become of the innocent little child called "birthday bumps" if he were to get
into alcoholism and substance abuse while growing up. To put it bluntly, GPLs
are events which happen in IITB on people's birthdays, in which all friends(?)
of the birthday guy gather together and beat his bum to pulp, using _chappals_
and _belts_, among other equipment which you would prefer not be lying around
your angry father.

The illogicality of this barbaric event isn't limited to the fact that the
birthday boy is hit in literally every possible way **except** with *laath*s,
though. The birthday boy will, I assume under fear of being labelled a _fattu_ /
_rotlu_, continue to smile and laugh as one dangerous strike after another lands
on his posterior.

If, God forbid, female spectators happen to be present during the event, this
fake masochism of the assaultee is complemented by the toxic machismo of the
assaulters, and the blows intensify.

Once damage sufficient for the main man to not be able to sit straight for at
least a week has been done, the bludgeoners will slow down and finally convey
birthday wishes, as if what they just did was for (in some weird way) the
greater good of strengthening their bonds of friendship. And that concludes your
typical GPL.

There is a tinge of hypocrisy in the fact that, in the institute, while we have
gotten rid of many things which were considered to be "insti culture" under the
pretense changing times, GPLs have only become bitter over the years. The
original, literal GPL presumably involved only _laaths_, which are of course
blunt attacks and should not hurt much, while also giving a feel of
"grown-up-ism" as compared to the school-day birthday bumps (which is heavily
sought by ~~college kids~~ young adults). The modern GPL, on the other hand,
with it's _belts_ and _chappals_ gives you scarred backs and sore bums for days.

GPLs are clearly the worst thing in student hostel culture after ragging (which
thankfully is long gone), and deserve to be looked at with such seriousness.
